<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V: Homicidal Possibilities</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Homicidal Possibilities</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(Tuesday, November 9; 3.30 <abbr>p.m.</abbr>)</p>
			</header>
			<p>Sibella entered with a firm, swinging gait, her head held high, her eyes sweeping the assemblage with bold interrogation. She was tall and of slender, athletic build, and, though she was not pretty, there was a cold, chiselled attractiveness in her lineaments that held one’s attention. Her face was at once vivid and intense; and there was a hauteur in her expression amounting almost to arrogance. Her dark, crisp hair was bobbed but not waved, and the severity of its lines accentuated the overdecisive cast of her features. Her hazel eyes were wide-spaced beneath heavy, almost horizontal eyebrows; her nose was straight and slightly prominent, and her mouth was large and firm, with a suggestion of cruelty in its thin lips. She was dressed simply, in a dark sport suit cut extremely short, silk-wool stockings of a heather mixture, and low-heeled mannish Oxfords.</p>
			<p>Chester presented the District Attorney to her as an old acquaintance, and permitted Markham to make the other introductions.</p>
			<p>“I suppose you know, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Markham, why Chet likes you,” she said, in a peculiarly plangent voice. “You’re one of the few persons at the Marylebone Club that he can beat at golf.”</p>
			<p>She seated herself before the centre-table, and crossed her knees comfortably.</p>
			<p>“I wish you’d get me a cigarette, Chet.” Her tone made the request an imperative.</p>
			<p>Vance rose at once and held out his case.</p>
			<p>“Do try one of these <span xml:lang="fr">Régies</span>, Miss Greene,” he urged in his best drawing-room manner. “If you say you don’t like them, I shall immediately change my brand.”</p>
			<p>“Rash man!” Sibella took a cigarette and permitted Vance to light it for her. Then she settled back in her chair and gave Markham a quizzical look. “Quite a wild party we pulled here last night, wasn’t it? We’ve never had so much commotion in the old mansion. And it was just my luck to sleep soundly through it all.” She made an aggrieved moue. “Chet didn’t call me till it was all over. Just like him⁠—he has a nasty disposition.”</p>
			<p>Somehow her flippancy did not shock me as it might have done in a different type of person. But Sibella struck me as a girl who, though she might feel things keenly, would not permit any misfortune to get the better of her; and I put her apparent callousness down to a dogged, if perverted, courageousness.</p>
			<p>Markham, however, resented her attitude.</p>
			<p>“One cannot blame <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Greene for not taking the matter lightly,” he reproved her. “The brutal murder of a defenseless woman and the attempted murder of a young girl hardly come under the head of diversion.”</p>
			<p>Sibella looked at him reproachfully. “You know, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Markham, you sound exactly like the Mother Superior of the stuffy convent I was confined in for two years.” She became suddenly grave. “Why draw a long face over something that’s happened and can’t be helped? Anyway, Julia never sought to brighten her little corner. She was always crabbed and faultfinding, and her good deeds wouldn’t fill a book. It may be unsisterly to say it, but she’s not going to be missed so dreadfully. Chet and I are certainly not going to pine away.”</p>
			<p>“And what about the brutal shooting of your other sister?” Markham was with difficulty controlling his indignation.</p>
			<p>Sibella’s eyelids narrowed perceptibly, and the lines of her face became set. But she erased the expression almost at once.</p>
			<p>“Well, Ada’s going to recover, isn’t she?” Despite her effort, she was unable to keep a certain hardness out of her voice. “She’ll have a nice long rest, and a nurse to wait on her. Am I expected to weep copiously because of baby sister’s escape?”</p>
			<p>Vance, who had been closely watching this clash between Sibella and Markham, now took a hand in the conversation.</p>
			<p>“My dear Markham, I can’t see what Miss Greene’s sentiments have to do with the matter. Her attitude may not be strictly in accord with the prescribed conduct for young ladies on such occasions, but I feel sure she has excellent reasons for her point of view. Let us give over moralizing, and seek Miss Greene’s assistance instead.”</p>
			<p>The girl darted him an amused, appreciative glance; and Markham made a gesture of indifferent acquiescence. It was plain that he regarded the present inquiry as of little importance.</p>
			<p>Vance gave the girl an engaging smile.</p>
			<p>“It’s really my fault, Miss Greene, that we are intruding here,” he apologized. “It was I, d’ ye see, that urged <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Markham to look into the case after your brother had expressed his disbelief in the burglar theory.”</p>
			<p>She nodded understandingly. “Oh, Chet sometimes has excellent hunches. It’s one of his very few merits.”</p>
			<p>“You, too, I gather, are sceptical in regard to the burglar?”</p>
			<p>“Sceptical?” She gave a short laugh. “I’m downright suspicious. I don’t know any burglars, though I’d dearly love to meet one; but I simply can’t bring my flighty brain to picture them going about their fascinating occupation the way our little entertainer did last night.”</p>
			<p>“You positively thrill me,” declared Vance. “Y’ see, our minority ideas coincide perfectly.”</p>
			<p>“Did Chet give you any intelligible explanation for his opinion?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid not. He was inclined to lay his feelings to metaphysical causes. His conviction was due, I took it, to some kind of psychic visitation. He knew, but could not explain: he was sure, but had no proof. It was most indefinite⁠—a bit esoteric, in fact.”</p>
			<p>“I’d never suspect Chet of spiritualistic leanings.” She shot her brother a tantalizing look. “He’s really deadly commonplace, when you get to know him.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, cut it, Sib,” objected Chester irritably. “You yourself had a spasm this morning when I told you the police were hotfooting it after a burglar.”</p>
			<p>Sibella made no answer. With a slight toss of the head she leaned over and threw her cigarette into the grate.</p>
			<p>“By the by, Miss Greene”⁠—Vance spoke casually⁠—“there has been considerable mystery about the disappearance of your brother’s revolver. It has completely vanished from his desk drawer. I wonder if you have seen it about the house anywhere.”</p>
			<p>At his mention of the gun Sibella stiffened slightly. Her eyes took on an expression of intentness, and the corners of her mouth lifted into a faintly ironical smile.</p>
			<p>“Chet’s revolver has gone, has it?” She put the question colorlessly, as if her thoughts were elsewhere. “No⁠ ⁠… I haven’t seen it.” Then, after a momentary pause: “But it was in Chet’s desk last week.”</p>
			<p>Chester heaved himself forward angrily.</p>
			<p>“What were you doing in my desk last week?” he demanded.</p>
			<p>“Don’t wax apoplectic,” the girl said carelessly. “I wasn’t looking for love missives. I simply couldn’t imagine you in love, Chet.⁠ ⁠…” The idea seemed to amuse her. “I was only looking for that old emerald stickpin you borrowed and never returned.”</p>
			<p>“It’s at the club,” he explained sulkily.</p>
			<p>“Is it, really! Well, I didn’t find it anyway; but I did see the revolver.⁠—Are you quite sure it’s gone?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be absurd,” the man growled. “I’ve searched everywhere for it.⁠ ⁠… Including your room,” he added vengefully.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you would! But why did you admit having it in the first place?” Her tone was scornful. “Why involve yourself unnecessarily?”</p>
			<p>Chester shifted uneasily.</p>
			<p>“This gentleman”⁠—he again pointed impersonally to Heath⁠—“asked me if I owned a revolver, and I told him ‘yes.’ If I hadn’t, some of the servants or one of my loving family would have told him. And I thought the truth was best.”</p>
			<p>Sibella smiled satirically.</p>
			<p>“My older brother, you observe, is a model of all the old-fashioned virtues,” she remarked to Vance. But she was obviously distraite. The revolver episode had somewhat shaken her self-assurance.</p>
			<p>“You say, Miss Greene, that the burglar idea does not appeal to you.” Vance was smoking languidly with half-closed eyes. “Can you think of any other explanation for the tragedy?”</p>
			<p>The girl raised her head and regarded him calculatingly.</p>
			<p>“Because I don’t happen to believe in burglars that shoot women and sneak away without taking anything, it doesn’t mean that I can suggest alternatives. I’m not a policewoman⁠—though I’ve often thought it would be jolly good sport⁠—and I had a vague idea it was the business of the police to run down criminals.⁠—You don’t believe in the burglar either, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vance, or you wouldn’t have followed up Chet’s hunch. Who do <em>you</em> think ran amuck here last night?”</p>
			<p>“My dear girl!” Vance raised a protesting hand. “If I had the foggiest idea I wouldn’t be annoying you with impertinent questions. I’m plodding with leaden feet in a veritable bog of ignorance.”</p>
			<p>He spoke negligently, but Sibella’s eyes were clouded with suspicion. Presently, however, she laughed gaily and held out her hand.</p>
			<p>“Another <span xml:lang="fr">Régie</span>, monsieur. I was on the verge of becoming serious; and I simply mustn’t become serious. It’s so frightfully boring. Besides, it gives one wrinkles. And I’m much too young for wrinkles.”</p>
			<p>“Like Ninon de L’Enclos, you’ll always be too young for wrinkles,” rejoined Vance, holding a match to her cigarette. “But perhaps you can suggest, without becoming too serious, someone who might have had a reason for wanting to kill your two sisters.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, as for that, I’d say we’d all come under suspicion. We’re not an ideal home circle, by any means. In fact, the Greenes are a queer collection. We don’t love one another the way a perfectly nice and proper family should. We’re always at each other’s throats, bickering and fighting about something or other. It’s rather a mess⁠—this ménage. It’s a wonder to me murder hasn’t been done long before. And we’ve all got to live here until 1932, or go it on our own; and, of course, none of us could make a decent living. A sweet paternal heritage!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9">9</a></p>
			<p>She smoked moodily for a few moments.</p>
			<p>“Yes, any one of us had ample reason to be murderously inclined toward all the others. Chet there would strangle me now if he didn’t think the nervous aftermath of the act would spoil his golf⁠—wouldn’t you, Chet dear? Rex regards us all as inferiors, and probably considers himself highly indulgent and altruistic not to have murdered us all long ago. And the only reason mother hasn’t killed us is that she’s paralyzed and can’t manage it. Julia, too, for that matter, could have seen us all boiled in oil without turning a hair. And as for Ada”⁠—her brows contracted and an extraordinary ferocity crept into her eyes⁠—“she’d dearly love to see us all exterminated. She’s not really one of us, and she hates us. Nor would I myself have any scruples about doing away with the rest of my fond family. I’ve thought of it often, but I could never decide on a nice thorough method.” She flicked her cigarette ash on the floor. “So there you are. If you’re looking for possibilities you have them galore. There’s no one under this ancestral roof who couldn’t qualify.”</p>
			<p>Though her words were meant to be satirical, I could not help feeling that a sombre, terrible truth underlay them. Vance, though apparently listening with amusement, had, I knew, been absorbing every inflection of her voice and play of expression, in an effort to relate the details of her sweeping indictment to the problem in hand.</p>
			<p>“At any rate,” he remarked offhandedly, “you are an amazingly frank young woman. However, I shan’t recommend your arrest just yet. I haven’t a particle of evidence against you, don’t y’ know. Annoyin’, ain’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, well,” sighed the girl, in mock disappointment, “you may pick up a clue later on. There’ll probably be another death or two around here before long. I’d hate to think the murderer would give up the job with so little really accomplished.”</p>
			<p>At this point Doctor Von Blon entered the drawing-room. Chester rose to greet him, and the formalities of introduction were quickly over. Von Blon bowed with reserved cordiality; but I noted that his manner to Sibella, while pleasant, was casual in the extreme. I wondered a little about this, but I recalled that he was an old friend of the family and probably took many of the social amenities for granted.</p>
			<p>“What have you to report, doctor?” asked Markham. “Will we be able to question the young lady this afternoon?”</p>
			<p>“I hardly think there’d be any harm in it,” Von Blon returned, seating himself beside Chester. “Ada has only a little reaction fever now, though she’s suffering from shock, and is pretty weak from loss of blood.”</p>
			<p>Doctor Von Blon was a suave, smooth-faced man of forty, with small, almost feminine features and an air of unwavering amiability. His urbanity struck me as too artificial⁠—“professional” is perhaps the word⁠—and there was something of the ambitious egoist about him. But I was far more attracted than repelled by him.</p>
			<p>Vance watched him attentively as he spoke. He was more anxious even than Heath, I think, to question the girl.</p>
			<p>“It was not a particularly serious wound, then?” Markham asked.</p>
			<p>“No, not serious,” the doctor assured him; “though it barely missed being fatal. Had the shot gone an inch deeper it would have torn across the lung. It was a very narrow escape.”</p>
			<p>“As I understand it,” interposed Vance, “the bullet travelled transversely over the left scapular region.”</p>
			<p>Von Blon inclined his head in agreement.</p>
			<p>“The shot was obviously aimed at the heart from the rear,” he explained, in his soft, modulated voice. “But Ada must have turned slightly to the right just as the revolver exploded; and the bullet, instead of going directly into her body, ploughed along the shoulder-blade at the level of the third dorsal vertebra, tore the capsular ligament, and lodged in the deltoid.” He indicated the location of the deltoid on his own left arm.</p>
			<p>“She had,” suggested Vance, “apparently turned her back on her assailant and attempted to run away; and he had followed her and placed the revolver almost against her back.⁠—Is that your interpretation of it, doctor?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that would seem to be the situation. And, as I said, at the crucial moment she veered a little, and thus saved her life.”</p>
			<p>“Would she have fallen immediately to the floor, despite the actual superficiality of the wound?”</p>
			<p>“It’s not unlikely. Not only would the pain have been considerable, but the shock must be taken into account. Ada⁠—or, for that matter, any woman⁠—might have fainted at once.”</p>
			<p>“And it’s a reasonable presumption,” pursued Vance, “that her assailant would have taken it for granted that the shot had been fatal.”</p>
			<p>“We may readily assume that to be the case.”</p>
			<p>Vance smoked a moment, his eyes averted.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he agreed, “I think we may assume that.⁠—And another point suggests itself. Since Miss Ada was in front of the dressing-table, a considerable distance from the bed, and since the weapon was held practically against her, the encounter would seem to take on the nature of a deliberate attack, rather than a haphazard shot fired by someone in a panic.”</p>
			<p>Von Blon looked shrewdly at Vance, and then turned a questioning gaze upon Heath. For a moment he was silent, as if weighing his reply, and when he spoke it was with guarded reserve.</p>
			<p>“Of course, one might interpret the situation that way. Indeed, the facts would seem to indicate such a conclusion. But, on the other hand, the intruder might have been very close to Ada; and the fact that the bullet entered her left shoulder at a particularly vital point may have been the purest accident.”</p>
			<p>“Quite true,” conceded Vance. “However, if the idea of premeditation is to be abrogated, we must account for the fact that the lights were on in the room when the butler entered immediately after the shooting.”</p>
			<p>Von Blon showed the keenest astonishment at this statement.</p>
			<p>“The lights were on? That’s most remarkable!” His brow crinkled into a perplexed frown, and he appeared to be assimilating Vance’s information. “Still,” he argued, “that very fact may account for the shooting. If the intruder had entered a lighted room he may have fired at the occupant lest his description be given to the police later.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, quite!” murmured Vance. “Anyway, let us hope we’ll learn the explanation when we’ve seen and spoken to Miss Ada.”</p>
			<p>“Well, why don’t we get to it?” grumbled Heath, whose ordinarily inexhaustible store of patience had begun to run low.</p>
			<p>“You’re so hasty, Sergeant,” Vance chided him. “Doctor Von Blon has just told us that Miss Ada is very weak; and anything we can learn beforehand will spare her just so many questions.”</p>
			<p>“All I want to find out,” expostulated Heath, “is if she got a look at the bird that shot her and can give me a description of him.”</p>
			<p>“That being the case, Sergeant, I fear you are doomed to have your ardent hopes dashed to the ground.”</p>
			<p>Heath chewed viciously on his cigar; and Vance turned again to Von Blon.</p>
			<p>“There’s one other question I’d like to ask, doctor. How long was it after Miss Ada had been wounded before you examined her?”</p>
			<p>“The butler’s already told us, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vance,” interposed Heath impatiently. “The doctor got here in half an hour.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that’s about right.” Von Blon’s tone was smooth and matter-of-fact. “I was unfortunately out on a call when Sproot phoned, but I returned about fifteen minutes later, and hurried right over. Luckily I live near here⁠—in East 48th Street.”</p>
			<p>“And was Miss Ada still unconscious when you arrived?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. She had lost considerable blood. The cook, however, had put a towel-compress on the wound, which of course helped.”</p>
			<p>Vance thanked him and rose.</p>
			<p>“And now, if you’ll be good enough to take us to your patient, we’ll be very grateful.”</p>
			<p>“As little excitement as possible, you understand,” admonished Von Blon, as he got up and led the way upstairs.</p>
			<p>Sibella and Chester seemed undecided about accompanying us; but as I turned into the hall I saw a look of interrogation flash between them, and a moment later they too joined us in the upper hall.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
