<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter" id="ch11">
				<h2>CHAPTER XI.<br/>
				 A Painful Interview</h2>
				<p class="head">(Friday, November 12; 11 a. m.)</p>
				<p>Markham glanced impatiently at his watch.</p>
				<p>“It’s getting late,” he complained, “and I have an important appointment at noon. I think I’ll have a go at Rex Greene, and then leave matters in your hands for the time being, Sergeant. There’s nothing much to be done here now, and your routine work must be gone through with.”</p>
				<p>Heath got up gloomily.</p>
				<p>“Yes; and one of the first things to be done is to go over this house with a fine-tooth comb for that revolver. If we could find that gun we’d be on our way.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t want to damp your ardor, Sergeant,” drawled Vance, “but something whispers in my ear that the weapon you yearn for is going to prove dashed elusive.”</p>
				<p>Heath looked depressed; he was obviously of Vance’s opinion.</p>
				<p>“A hell of a case this is! Not a lead⁠—nothing to get your teeth in.”</p>
				<p>He went to the archway and yanked the bell-cord viciously. When Sproot appeared he almost barked his demand that Mr. Rex Greene be produced at once; and he stood looking truculently after the retreating butler as if longing for an excuse to follow up his order with violence.</p>
				<p>Rex came in nervously, a half-smoked cigarette hanging from his lips. His eyes were sunken; his cheeks sagged, and his short splay fingers fidgeted with the hem of his smoking-jacket, like those of a man under the influence of hyoscine. He gave us a resentful, half-frightened gaze, and planted himself aggressively before us, refusing to take the seat Markham indicated. Suddenly he demanded fiercely:</p>
				<p>“Have you found out yet who killed Julia and Chester?”</p>
				<p>“No,” Markham admitted; “but we’ve taken every precaution against any recurrence.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Precaution? What have you done?”</p>
				<p>“We’ve stationed a man both front and rear⁠—”</p>
				<p>A cackling laugh cut him short.</p>
				<p>“A lot of good that’ll do! The person who’s after us Greenes has a key. He has a key, I tell you! And he can get in whenever he wants to, and nobody can stop him.”</p>
				<p>“I think you exaggerate a little,” returned Markham mildly. “In any case, we hope to put our hands on him very soon. And that’s why I’ve asked you here again⁠—it’s quite possible that you can help us.”</p>
				<p>“What do I know?” The man’s words were defiant, and he took several long inhalations on his cigarette, the ashes of which fell upon his jacket unnoticed.</p>
				<p>“You were asleep, I understand, when the shot was fired last night,” went on Markham’s quiet voice; “but Sergeant Heath tells me you were awake until after eleven and heard noises in the hall. Suppose you tell us just what happened.”</p>
				<p>“Nothing happened!” Rex blurted. “I went to bed at half past ten, but I was too nervous to sleep. Then, some time later, the moon came out and fell across the foot of the bed; and I got up and pulled down the shade. About ten minutes later I heard a scraping sound in the hall, and directly afterward a door closed softly⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Just a moment, Mr. Greene,” interrupted Vance. “Can you be a little more definite about that noise? What did it sound like?”</p>
				<p>“I didn’t pay any attention to it,” was the whining reply. “It might have been almost anything. It was like some one laying down a bundle, or dragging something across the floor; or it might have been old Sproot in his bedroom slippers, though it didn’t sound like him⁠—that is, I didn’t associate him with the sound when I heard it.”</p>
				<p>“And after that?”</p>
				<p>“After that? I lay awake in bed ten or fifteen minutes longer. I was restless and⁠—and expectant; so I turned on the lights to see what time it was, and smoked half a cigarette⁠—”</p>
				<p>“It was twenty-five minutes past eleven, I understand.”</p>
				<p>“That’s right. Then a few minutes later I put out the light, and must have gone right to sleep.”</p>
				<p>There was a pause, and Heath drew himself up aggressively.</p>
				<p>“Say, Greene: know anything about fire-arms?” He shot the question out brutally.</p>
				<p>Rex stiffened. His lips sagged open, and his cigarette fell to the floor. The muscles of his thin jowls twitched, and he glared menacingly at the Sergeant.</p>
				<p>“What do you mean?” The words were like a snarl; and I noticed that his whole body was quivering.</p>
				<p>“Know what became of your brother’s revolver?” pursued Heath relentlessly, thrusting out his jaw.</p>
				<p>Rex’s mouth was working in a paroxysm of fury and fear, but he seemed unable to articulate.</p>
				<p>“Where have you got it hidden?” Again Heath’s voice sounded harshly.</p>
				<p>“Revolver?⁠ ⁠… Hidden?⁠ ⁠…” At last Rex had succeeded in formulating his words. “You⁠—filthy rotter! If you’ve got any idea that I have the revolver, go up and tear my room apart and look for it⁠—and be damned to you!” His eyes flashed, and his upper lip lifted over his teeth. But there was fright in his attitude as well as rage.</p>
				<p>Heath had leaned forward and was about to say something further, when Vance quickly rose and laid a restraining hand on the Sergeant’s arm. He was too late, however, to avoid the thing he evidently hoped to forestall. What Heath had already said had proved sufficient stimulus to bring about a terrible reaction in his victim.</p>
				<p>“What do I care what that unspeakable swine says?” he shouted, pointing a palsied finger at the Sergeant. Oaths and vituperation welled shrilly from his twitching lips. His insensate wrath seemed to pass all ordinary bounds. His enormous head was thrust forward like a python’s; and his face was cyanosed and contorted.</p>
				<p>Vance stood poised, watching him alertly; and Markham had instinctively moved back his chair. Even Heath was startled by Rex’s inordinate malignity.</p>
				<p>What might have happened I don’t know, had not Von Blon at that moment stepped swiftly into the room and placed a restraining hand on the youth’s shoulder.</p>
				<p>“Rex!” he said, in a calm, authoritative voice. “Get a grip on yourself. You’re disturbing Ada.”</p>
				<p>The other ceased speaking abruptly; but his ferocity of manner did not wholly abate. He shook off the doctor’s hand angrily and swung round, facing Von Blon.</p>
				<p>“What are you interfering for?” he cried. “You’re always meddling in this house, coming here when you’re not sent for, and nosing into our affairs. Mother’s paralysis is only an excuse. You’ve said yourself she’ll never get well, and yet you keep coming, bringing her medicine and sending bills.” He gave the doctor a crafty leer. “Oh, you don’t deceive me. I know why you come here! It’s Sibella!” Again he thrust out his head and grinned shrewdly. “She’d be a good catch for a doctor, too⁠—wouldn’t she? Plenty of money⁠—”</p>
				<p>Suddenly he halted. His eyes did not leave Von Blon, but he shrank back and the twitching of his face began once more. A quivering finger went up; and as he spoke his voice rose excitedly.</p>
				<p>“But Sibella’s money isn’t enough. You want ours along with hers. So you’re arranging for her to inherit all of it. That’s it⁠—that’s it! <em>You’re</em> the one who’s been doing all this.⁠ ⁠… Oh, my God! You’ve got Chester’s gun⁠—you took it! And you’ve got a key to the house⁠—easy enough for you to have one made. That’s how you got in.”</p>
				<p>Von Blon shook his head sadly and smiled with rueful tolerance. It was an embarrassing moment, but he carried it off well.</p>
				<p>“Come, Rex,” he said quietly, like a person speaking to a refractory child. “You’ve said enough⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Have I!” cried the youth, his eyes gleaming unnaturally. “You knew Chester had the revolver. You went camping with him the summer he got it⁠—he told me so the other day, after Julia was killed.” His beady little eyes seemed to stare from his head; a spasm shook his emaciated body; and his fingers again began worrying the hem of his jacket.</p>
				<p>Von Blon stepped swiftly forward and, putting a hand on each of his shoulders, shook him.</p>
				<p>“That’ll do, Rex!” The words were a sharp command. “If you carry on this way, we’ll have to lock you up in an institution.”</p>
				<p>The threat was uttered in what I considered an unnecessarily brutal tone; but it had the desired effect. A haunting fear showed in Rex’s eyes. He seemed suddenly to go limp, and he docilely permitted Von Blon to lead him from the room.</p>
				<p>“A sweet specimen, that Rex,” commented Vance. “Not a person one would choose for a boon companion. Aggravated macrocephalia⁠—cortical irritation. But I say, Sergeant; really, y’ know, you shouldn’t have prodded the lad so.”</p>
				<p>Heath grunted.</p>
				<p>“You can’t tell me that guy don’t know something. And you can bet your sweet life I’m going to search his room damn good for that gun.”</p>
				<p>“It appears to me,” rejoined Vance, “he’s too flighty to have planned the massacre in this house. He might blow up under pressure and hit somebody with a handy missile; but I doubt if he’d lay any deep schemes and bide his time.”</p>
				<p>“He’s good and scared about something,” persisted Heath morosely.</p>
				<p>“Hasn’t he cause to be? Maybe he thinks the elusive gunman hereabouts will chose him as the next target.”</p>
				<p>“If there <em>is</em> another gunman, he showed damn bad taste not picking Rex out first.” It was evident the Sergeant was still smarting under the epithets that had so recently been directed at him.</p>
				<p>Von Blon returned to the drawing-room at this moment, looking troubled.</p>
				<p>“I’ve got Rex quieted,” he said. “Gave him five grains of luminal. He’ll sleep for a few hours and wake up penitent. I’ve rarely seen him quite as violent as he was to-day. He’s supersensitive⁠—cerebral neurasthenia; and he’s apt to fly off the handle. But he’s never dangerous.” He scanned our faces swiftly. “One of you gentlemen must have said something pretty severe.”</p>
				<p>Heath looked sheepish. “I asked him where he’d hid the gun.”</p>
				<p>“Ah!” The doctor gave the Sergeant a look of questioning reproach. “Too bad! We have to be careful with Rex. He’s all right so long as he isn’t opposed too strongly. But I don’t just see, sir, what your object could have been in questioning him about the revolver. You surely don’t suspect him of having had a hand in these terrible shootings.”</p>
				<p>“You tell me who did the shootings, doc,” retorted Heath pugnaciously, “and then I’ll tell you who I <em>don’t</em> suspect.”</p>
				<p>“I regret that I am unable to enlighten you.” Von Blon’s tone exuded its habitual pleasantness. “But I can assure you Rex had no part in them. They’re quite out of keeping with his pathologic state.”</p>
				<p>“That’s the defense of half the high-class killers we get the goods on,” countered Heath.</p>
				<p>“I see I can’t argue with you.” Von Blon sighed regretfully, and turned an engaging countenance in Markham’s direction. “Rex’s absurd accusations puzzled me deeply, but, since this officer admits he practically accused the boy of having the revolver, the situation becomes perfectly clear. A common form of instinctive self-protection, this attempting to shift blame on others. You can see, of course, that Rex was merely trying to turn suspicion upon me so as to free himself. It’s unfortunate, for he and I were always good friends. Poor Rex!”</p>
				<p>“By the by, doctor,” came Vance’s indolent voice; “that point about your being with Mr. Chester Greene on the camping-trip when he first secured the gun: was that correct? Or was it merely a fancy engendered by Rex’s self-protective instinct?”</p>
				<p>Von Blon smiled with faultless urbanity and, putting his head a little on one side, appeared to recall the past.</p>
				<p>“It may be correct,” he admitted. “I was once with Chester on a camping-trip. Yes, it’s quite likely⁠—though I shouldn’t like to state it definitely. It was so long ago.”</p>
				<p>“Fifteen years, I think, Mr. Greene said. Ah, yes⁠—a long time ago. <i lang="la">Eheu! fugaces, Postume, Postume, labuntur anni.</i> It’s very depressin’. And do you recall, doctor, if Mr. Greene had a revolver along on that particular outing?”</p>
				<p>“Since you mention it, I believe I do recall his having one, though again I should choose not to be definite on the subject.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps you may recollect if he used it for target practice.” Vance’s tone was dulcet and uneager. “Popping away at tree-boles and tin cans and what not, don’t y’ know.”</p>
				<p>Von Blon nodded reminiscently.</p>
				<p>“Ye-es. It’s quite possible.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“And you yourself may have done a bit of desult’ry popping, what?”</p>
				<p>“To be sure, I may have.” Von Blon spoke musingly, like one recalling childish pranks. “Yes, it’s wholly possible.”</p>
				<p>Vance lapsed into a disinterested silence, and the doctor, after a moment’s hesitation, rose.</p>
				<p>“I must be going, I’m afraid.” And with a gracious bow he started toward the door. “Oh, by the way,” he said, pausing, “I almost forgot that Mrs. Greene told me she desired to see you gentlemen before you went. Forgive me if I suggest that it might be wise to humor her. She’s something of a dowager, you know, and her invalidism has made her rather irritable and exacting.”</p>
				<p>“I’m glad you mentioned Mrs. Greene, doctor.” It was Vance who spoke. “I’ve been intending to ask you about her. What is the nature of her paralysis?”</p>
				<p>Von Blon appeared surprised.</p>
				<p>“Why, a sort of paraplegia dolorosa⁠—that is, a paralysis of the legs and lower part of the body, accompanied by severe pains due to pressure of the indurations on the spinal cord and nerves. No spasticity of the limbs has supervened, however. Came on very suddenly without any premonitory symptoms about ten years ago⁠—probably the result of transverse myelitis. There’s nothing really to be done but to keep her as comfortable as possible with symptomatic treatment, and to tone up the heart action. A sixtieth of strychnine three times a day takes care of the circulation.”</p>
				<p>“Couldn’t by any chance be a hysterical akinesia?”</p>
				<p>“Good Lord, no! There’s no hysteria.” Then his eyes widened in amazement. “Oh, I see! No; there’s no possibility of recovery, even partial. It’s organic paralysis.”</p>
				<p>“And atrophy?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes. Muscular atrophy is now pronounced.”</p>
				<p>“Thank you very much.” Vance lay back with half-closed eyes.</p>
				<p>“Oh, not at all.⁠—And remember, Mr. Markham, that I always stand ready to help in any way I can. Please don’t hesitate to call on me.” He bowed again, and went out.</p>
				<p>Markham got up and stretched his legs.</p>
				<p>“Come; we’ve been summoned to appear.” His facetiousness was a patent effort to shake off the depressing gloom of the case.</p>
				<p>Mrs. Greene received us with almost unctuous cordiality.</p>
				<p>“I knew you’d grant the request of a poor old useless cripple,” she said, with an appealing smile; “though I’m used to being ignored. No one pays any attention to my wishes.”</p>
				<p>The nurse stood at the head of the bed arranging the pillows beneath the old lady’s shoulders.</p>
				<p>“Is that comfortable now?” she asked.</p>
				<p>Mrs. Greene made a gesture of annoyance.</p>
				<p>“A lot you care whether I’m comfortable or not! Why can’t you let me alone, nurse? You’re always disturbing me. There was nothing wrong with the pillows. And I don’t want you in here now anyway. Go and sit with Ada.”</p>
				<p>The nurse drew a long, patient breath, and went silently from the room, closing the door behind her.</p>
				<p>Mrs. Greene reverted to her former ingratiating manner.</p>
				<p>“No one understands my needs the way Ada does, Mr. Markham. What a relief it will be when the dear child gets well enough to care for me again! But I mustn’t complain. The nurse does the best she knows how, I suppose.⁠—Please sit down, gentlemen⁠ ⁠… yet what wouldn’t I give if I could only stand up the way you can. No one realizes what it means to be a helpless paralytic.”</p>
				<p>Markham did not avail himself of the invitation, but waited until she had finished speaking and then said:</p>
				<p>“Please believe that you have my deepest sympathy, madam.⁠ ⁠… You sent for me, Doctor Von Blon said.”</p>
				<p>“Yes!” She looked at him calculatingly. “I wanted to ask you a favor.”</p>
				<p>She paused, and Markham bowed but did not answer.</p>
				<p>“I wanted to request you to drop this investigation. I’ve had enough worry and disturbance as it is. But <em>I</em> don’t count. It’s the family I’m thinking of⁠—the good name of the Greenes.” A note of pride came into her voice. “What need is there to drag us through the mire and make us an object of scandalous gossip for the <i lang="fr">canaille</i>? I want peace and quiet, Mr. Markham. I won’t be here much longer; and why should my house be overrun with policemen just because Julia and Chester have suffered their just deserts for neglecting me and letting me suffer here alone? I’m an old woman and a cripple, and I’m deserving of a little consideration.”</p>
				<p>Her face clouded, and her voice became harsh.</p>
				<p>“You haven’t any right to come here and upset my house and annoy me in this outrageous fashion! I haven’t had a minute’s rest since all this excitement began, and my spine is paining me so I can hardly breathe.” She took several stertorous breaths, and her eyes flashed indignantly. “I don’t expect any better treatment from my children⁠—they’re hard and thoughtless. But you, Mr. Markham⁠—an outsider, a stranger: why should you want to torture me with all this commotion? It’s outrageous⁠—inhuman!”</p>
				<p>“I am sorry if the presence of the officers of the law in your house disturbs you,” Markham told her gravely; “but I have no alternative. When a crime has been committed it is my duty to investigate, and to use every means at my disposal to bring the guilty person to justice.”</p>
				<p>“Justice!” The old lady repeated the word scornfully. “Justice has already been done. I’ve been avenged for the treatment I’ve received these many years, lying here helpless.”</p>
				<p>There was something almost terrifying in the woman’s cruel and unrelenting hatred of her children, and in the cold-blooded satisfaction she seemed to take in the fact that two of them had been punished by death. Markham, naturally sympathetic, revolted against her attitude.</p>
				<p>“However much gratification you may feel at the murder of your son and daughter, madam,” he said coldly, “it does not release me from my duty to find the murderer.⁠—Was there anything else you wished to speak to me about?”</p>
				<p>For a while she sat silent, her face working with impotent passion. The gaze she bent on Markham was almost ferocious. But presently the vindictive vigilance of her eyes relaxed, and she drew a deep sigh.</p>
				<p>“No; you may go now. I have nothing more to say. And, anyway, who cares about an old helpless woman like me? I should have learned by this time that nobody thinks of my comfort, lying here all alone, unable to help myself⁠—a nuisance to every one.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Her whining, self-pitying voice followed us as we made our escape.</p>
				<p>“Y’ know, Markham,” said Vance, as we came into the lower hall, “the Empress Dowager is not entirely devoid of reason. Her suggestion is deserving of consideration. The clarion voice of duty may summon you to this quest, but⁠—my word!⁠—whither shall one quest? There’s nothing sane in this house⁠—nothing that lends itself to ordin’ry normal reason. Why not take her advice and chuck it? Even if you learn the truth, it’s likely to prove a sort of Pyrrhic vict’ry. I’m afraid it’ll be more terrible than the crimes themselves.”</p>
				<p>Markham did not deign to answer; he was familiar with Vance’s heresies, and he also knew that Vance himself would be the last person to throw over an unsolved problem.</p>
				<p>“We’ve got something to go on, Mr. Vance,” submitted Heath solemnly, but without enthusiasm. “There’s those foot-tracks, for instance; and we’ve got the missing gun to find. Dubois is up-stairs now taking finger-prints. And the reports on the servants’ll be coming along soon. There’s no telling what’ll turn up in a few days. I’ll have a dozen men working on this case before night.”</p>
				<p>“Such zeal, Sergeant! But it’s in the atmosphere of this old house⁠—not in tangible clews⁠—that the truth lies hidden. It’s somewhere in these old jumbled rooms; it’s peering out from dark corners and from behind doors. It’s here⁠—in this very hall, perhaps.”</p>
				<p>His tone was fraught with troubled concern, and Markham looked at him sharply.</p>
				<p>“I think you’re right, Vance,” he muttered. “But how is one to get at it?”</p>
				<p>“ ’Pon my soul, I don’t know. How does one get at spectres, anyway? I’ve never had much intimate intercourse with ghosts, don’t y’ know.”</p>
				<p>“You’re talking rubbish!” Markham jerked on his overcoat, and turned to Heath. “You go ahead, Sergeant; and keep in touch with me. If nothing develops from your inquiries, we’ll discuss the next step.”</p>
				<p>And he and Vance and I went out to the waiting car.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
