<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Characters of the Book</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Characters of the Book</h2>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Philo Vance.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.-X.</abbr> Markham. District Attorney of New York County.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tobias Greene. The mistress of the Greene mansion.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Julia Greene. The eldest daughter.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Sibella Greene. Another daughter.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Ada Greene. The youngest daughter.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Chester Greene. The elder son.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Rex Greene. The younger son.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Arthur Von Blon. The Greene family physician.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Sproot. The Greene butler.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Gertrude Mannheim. The cook.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Hemming. The senior maid.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Barton. The junior maid.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Miss Craven. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Greene’s nurse.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Chief Inspector O’Brien. Of the Police Department of New York City.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>William <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Moran. Commanding officer of the Detective Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Ernest Heath. Sergeant of the Homicide Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Snitkin. Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Burke. Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Captain Anthony <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Jerym. Bertillon expert.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Captain Dubois. Fingerprint expert.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Emanuel Doremus. Medical Examiner.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Drumm. An official police surgeon.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Marie O’Brien. A Police nurse.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Swacker. Secretary to the District Attorney.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Currie. Vance’s valet.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
