<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is, I hope, unnecessary for me to state that I have received official permission for my task. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Benson Murder Case</i> (Scribners, 1926). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The “Canary” Murder Case</i> (Scribners, 1927). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was subsequently proved correct. Nearly a year later Maleppo was arrested in Detroit, extradited to New York, and convicted of the murder. His two companions had already been successfully prosecuted for robbery. They are now serving long terms in Sing Sing. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Amos Feathergill was then an Assistant District Attorney. He later ran on the Tammany ticket for assemblyman, and was elected. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was Sergeant Ernest Heath, of the Homicide Bureau, who had been in charge of both the Benson and the Canary cases; and, although he had been openly antagonistic to Vance during the first of these investigations, a curious good-fellowship had later grown up between them. Vance admired the Sergeant’s dogged and straightforward qualities; and Heath had developed a keen respect⁠—with certain reservations, however⁠—for Vance’s abilities. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vance, after reading proof of this sentence, requested me to make mention here of that beautiful volume, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Terra Cotta of the Italian Renaissance</i>, recently published by the National Terra Cotta Society, New York. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Doctor Emanuel Doremus, the Chief Medical Examiner. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sibella was here referring to Tobias Greene’s will, which stipulated not only that the Greene mansion should be maintained intact for twenty-five years, but that the legatees should live on the estate during that time or become disinherited. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Plon, Nourrit et Cie., Paris, 1893. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Inspector William <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Moran, who died last summer, had been the commanding officer of the Detective Bureau for eight years. He was a man of rare and unusual qualities, and with his death the New York Police Department lost one of its most efficient and trustworthy officials. He had formerly been a well-known upstate banker who had been forced to close his doors during the 1907 panic. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain Anthony <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Jerym was one of the shrewdest and most painstaking criminologists of the New York Police Department. Though he had begun his career as an expert in the Bertillon system of measurements, he had later specialized in footprints⁠—a subject which he had helped to elevate to an elaborate and complicated science. He had spent several years in Vienna studying Austrian methods, and had developed a means of scientific photography for footprints which gave him rank with such men as Londe, Burais, and Reiss. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I remember, back in the nineties, when I was a schoolboy, hearing my father allude to certain picturesque tales of Tobias Greene’s escapades. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain Hagedorn was the expert who supplied Vance with the technical data in the Benson murder case, which made it possible for him to establish the height of the murderer. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was Inspector Brenner who examined and reported on the chiselled jewel-box in the “Canary” murder case. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the famous cases mentioned as being in some manner comparable to the Greene shootings were the mass murders of Landru, Jean-Baptiste Troppmann, Fritz Haarmann, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Belle Gunness; the tavern murders of the Benders; the Van der Linden poisonings in Holland; the Bela Kiss tin-cask stranglings; the Rugeley murders of Doctor William Palmer; and the beating to death of Benjamin Nathan. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The famous impure-milk scandal was then to the fore, and the cases were just appearing on the court calendar. Also, at that time, there was an anti-gambling campaign in progress in New York; and the District Attorney’s office had charge of all the prosecutions. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Modern Gallery was then under the direction of Marius de Zayas, whose collection of African statuette-fetishes was perhaps the finest in America. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Colonel Benjamin Hanlon, one of the Department’s greatest authorities on extradition, was then the commanding officer of the Detective Division attached to the District Attorney’s office, with quarters in the Criminal Courts Building. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the volumes of Tobias Greene’s library I may mention the following as typical of the entire collection: Heinroth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De morborum animi et pathematum animi differentia</i>, Hoh’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De maniae pathologia</i>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. S.</abbr> Knight’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Observations on the Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment of Derangement of the Mind</i>, Krafft-Ebing’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Grundzüge der Kriminal-Psychologie</i>, Bailey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary of a Resurrectionist</i>, Lange’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Om Arvelighedens Inflydelse i Sindssygedommene</i>, Leuret’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Fragments psychologiques sur la folie</i>, D’Aguanno’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Recensioni di antropologia giuridica</i>, Amos’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Crime and Civilization</i>, Andronico’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Studi clinici sul delitto</i>, Lombroso’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Uomo Delinquente</i>, de Aramburu’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="es">La nueva ciencia penal</i>, Bleakley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Some Distinguished Victims of the Scaffold</i>, Arenal’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Psychologie comparée du criminel</i>, Aubry’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">De l’homicide commis par la femme</i>, Beccaria’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Crimes and Punishments</i>, Benedikt’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anatomical Studies Upon the Brains of Criminals</i>, Bittinger’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Crimes of Passion and of Reflection</i>, Bosselli’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Nuovi studi sul tatuaggio nei criminali</i>, Favalli’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">La delinquenza in rapporto alla civiltà</i>, de Feyfer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="nl">Verhandeling over den Kindermoord</i>, Fuld’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Realismus und das Strafrecht</i>, Hamilton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scientific Detection of Crime</i>, von Holtzendorff’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Das Irische Gefängnissystem insbesondere die Zwischenanstalten vor der Entlassung der Sträflinge</i>, Jardine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Criminal Trials</i>, Lacassagne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’homme criminel comparé à l’homme primitif</i>, Llanos y Torriglia’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="es">Ferri y su escuela</i>, Owen Luke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Crime in England</i>, MacFarlane’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives and Exploits of Banditti</i>, M’Levy’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Curiosities of Crime in Edinburgh</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Complete Newgate Calendar</i>, Pomeroy’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">German and French Criminal Procedure</i>, Rizzone’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Delinquenza e punibilità</i>, Rosenblatt’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Skizzen aus der Verbrecherwelt</i>, Soury’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le crime et les criminels</i>, Wey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Criminal Anthropology</i>, Amadei’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Crani d’assassini</i>, Benedikt’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Raubthiertypus am menschlichen Gehirne</i>, Fasini’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Studi su delinquenti femmine</i>, Mills’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arrested and Aberrant Development and Gyres in the Brain of Paranoiacs and Criminals</i>, de Paoli’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Quattro crani di delinquenti</i>, Zuckerkandl’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Morphologie des Gesichtsschädels</i>, Bergonzoli’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Sui pazzi criminali in Italia</i>, Brierre de Boismont’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Rapports de la folie suicide avec la folie homicide</i>, Buchnet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Relation of Madness to Crime</i>, Calucci’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Il jure penale e la freniatria</i>, Davey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Insanity and Crime</i>, Morel’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le procès Chorinski</i>, Parrot’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Sur la monomanie homicide</i>, Savage’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moral Insanity</i>, Teed’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On Mind, Insanity, and Criminality</i>, Worckmann’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On Crime and Insanity</i>, Vaucher’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Système préventif des délits et des crimes</i>, Thacker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Psychology of Vice and Crime</i>, Tarde’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Criminalité Comparée</i>, Tamassia’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Gli ultimi studi sulla criminalità</i>, Sikes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Studies of Assassination</i>, Senior’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Remarkable Crimes and Trials in Germany</i>, Savarini’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Vexata Quaestio</i>, Sampson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rationale of Crime</i>, Noellner’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Kriminal-psychologische Denkwürdigkeiten</i>, Sighele’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La foule criminelle</i>, and Korsakoff’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Kurs psichiatrii</i>. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Doctor Blyth was one of the defense witnesses in the Crippen trial. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Doctor Felix Oppenheimer was then the leading authority on paralysis in America. He has since returned to Germany, where he now holds the chair of neurology at the University of Freiburg. <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hennessey was the detective stationed in the Narcoss Flats to watch the Greene mansion. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It will be remembered that in the famous Molineux poisoning case the cyanide of mercury was administered by way of a similar drug⁠—to wit: Bromo-Seltzer. <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Chief Inspector O’Brien, who was in command of the entire Police Department, was, I learned later, an uncle of the Miss O’Brien who was acting officially as nurse at the Greene mansion. <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I recalled that Guilfoyle and Mallory were the two men who had been set to watch Tony Skeel in the Canary murder case. <a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vance was here referring to the chapter called “The Aesthetic Hypothesis” in Clive Bell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art</i>. But, despite the somewhat slighting character of his remark, Vance was an admirer of Bell’s criticisms, and had spoken to me with considerable enthusiasm of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Since Cézanne</i>. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was the first and only time during my entire friendship with Vance that I ever heard him use a Scriptural expletive. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As I learned later, Doctor Von Blon, who was an ardent amateur photographer, often used half-gram tablets of cyanide of potassium; and there had been three of them in his darkroom when Ada had called. Several days later, when preparing to redevelop a plate, he could find only two, but had thought little of the loss until questioned by Vance. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I later asked Vance to rearrange the items for me in the order of his final sequence. The distribution, which told him the truth, was as follows: 3, 4, 44, 92, 9, 6, 2, 47, 1, 5, 32, 31, 98, 8, 81, 84, 82, 7, 10, 11, 61, 15, 16, 93, 33, 94, 76, 75, 48, 17, 38, 55, 54, 18, 39, 56, 41, 42, 28, 43, 58, 59, 83, 74, 40, 12, 34, 13, 14, 37, 22, 23, 35, 36, 19, 73, 26, 20, 21, 45, 25, 46, 27, 29, 30, 57, 77, 24, 78, 79, 51, 50, 52, 53, 49, 95, 80, 85, 86, 87, 88, 60, 62, 64, 63, 66, 65, 96, 89, 67, 71, 69, 68, 70, 97, 90, 91, 72. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We later learned from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mannheim that Mannheim had once saved Tobias from criminal prosecution by taking upon himself the entire blame of one of Tobias’s shadiest extralegal transactions, and had exacted from Tobias the promise that, in event of his own death or incarceration, he would adopt and care for Ada, whom <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mannheim had placed in a private institution at the age of five, to protect her from Mannheim’s influence. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An account of the cases of Madeleine Smith and Constance Kent may be found in Edmund Lester Pearson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Murder at Smutty Nose</i>; and a record of Marie Boyer’s case is included in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. B.</abbr> Irving’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Book of Remarkable Criminals</i>. Grete Beyer was the last woman to be publicly executed in Germany. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Selbstverletzungen kommen nicht selten vor; abgesehen von solchen bei fingierten Raubanfällen, stösst man auf sie dann, wenn Entschädigungen erpresst werden sollen; so geschieht es, dass nach einer harmlosen Balgerei einer der Kämpfenden mit Verletzungen auftritt, die er damals erlitten haben will. Kenntlich sind solche Selbstverstümmelungen daran, dass die Betreffenden meistens die Operation wegen der grossen Schmerzen nicht ganz zu Ende führen, und dass es meistens Leute mit übertrieben pietistischer Färbung und mehr einsamen Lebenswandels sind.”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System der Kriminalistik</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32⁠–⁠34. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Dass man sich durch den Sitz der Wunde niemals täuschen lassen darf, beweisen zwei Fälle. Im Wiener Prater hatte sich ein Mann in Gegenwart mehrerer Personen getötet, indem er sich mit einem Revolver in den Hinterkopf schoss. Wären nicht die Aussagen der Zeugen vorgelegen, hätte wohl kaum jemand an einen Selbstmord geglaubt. Ein Soldat tötete sich durch einen in den Rücken gehenden Schuss aus einem Militärgewehr, über das er nach entsprechender Fixierung sich gelegt hatte; auch hier wäre aus dem Sitz der Wunde wohl kaum auf Selbstmord geschlossen worden.”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System der Kriminalistik</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 843. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Es wurde zeitlich morgens dem UR. die Meldung von der Auffindung eines ‘Ermordeten’ überbracht. An Ort und Stelle fand sich der Leichnam eines für wohlhabend geltenden Getreidehändlers <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M.</abbr>, auf dem Gesichte liegend, mit einer Schusswunde hinter dem rechten Ohre. Die Kugel war über dem linken Auge im Stirnknochen stecken geblieben, nachdem sie das Gehirn durchdrungen hatte. Die Fundstelle der Leiche befand sich etwa in der Mitte einer über einen ziemlich tiefen Fluss führenden Brücke. Am Schlusse der Lokalerhebungen und als die Leiche eben zur Obduktion fortgebracht werden sollte, fiel es dem UR. zufällig auf, dass das (hölzerne und wettergraue) Brückengeländer an der Stelle, wo auf dem Boden der Leichnam lag, eine kleine und sichtlich ganz frische Beschädigung aufwies, so als ob man dort (am oberen Rande) mit einem harten, kantigen Körper heftig angestossen wäre. Der Gedanke, dass dieser Umstand mit dem Morde in Zusammenhang stehe, war nicht gut von der Hand zu weisen. Ein Kahn war bald zur Stelle und am Brückenjoche befestigt; nun wurde vom Kahne aus (unter der fraglichen Stelle) der Flussgrund mit Rechen an langen Stielen sorgfältig abgesucht. Nach kurzer Arbeit kam wirklich etwas Seltsames zutage: eine etwa 4 <abbr>m</abbr> lange starke Schnur, an deren einem Ende ein grosser Feldstein, an deren anderem Ende eine abgeschossene Pistole befestigt war, in deren Lauf die später aus dem Kopfe des <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M.</abbr> genommene Kugel genau passte. Nun war die Sache klarer Selbstmord; der Mann hatte sich mit der aufgefundenen Vorrichtung auf die Brücke begeben, den Stein über das Brückengeländer gehängt und sich die Kugel hinter dem rechten Ohre ins Hirn gejagt. Als er getroffen war, liess er die Pistole infolge des durch den Stein bewirkten Zuges aus und diese wurde von dem schweren Steine an der Schnur über das Geländer und in das Wasser gezogen. Hierbei hatte die Pistole, als sie das Geländer passierte, heftig an dieses angeschlagen und die betreffende Verletzung erzeugt.”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System der Kriminalistik</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 834⁠–⁠836. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Die Absicht kann dahin gehen, den Verdacht von sich auf jemand anderen zu wälzen, was namentlich dann Sinn hat, wenn der Täter schon im voraus annehmen durfte, dass sich der Verdacht auf ihn lenken werde. In diesem Falle erzeugt er recht auffallende, deutliche Spuren und zwar mit angezogenen Schuhen, die von den seinigen sich wesentlich unterscheiden. Man kann, wie angestellte Versuche beweisen, in dieser Weise recht gute Spuren erzeugen.”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System der Kriminalistik</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 667. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Über Gummiüberschuhe und Galoschen s. Loock; Chem. u. Phot. bei Krim. Forschungen: Düsseldorf, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System der Kriminalistik</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 668. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Die neuesten amerikanischen Schutzvorrichtungen haben direkt mit der Kasse selbst nichts zu tun und können eigentlich an jedem Behältnisse angebracht werden. Sie bestehen aus chemisehen Schutzmitteln oder Selbstschüssen, und wollen die Anwesenheit eines Menschen, der den Schrank unbefugt geöffnet hat, aus sanitären oder sonst physischen Gründen unmöglich machen. Auch die juristische Seite der Frage ist zu erwägen, da man den Einbrecher doch nicht ohne weiteres töten oder an der Gesundheit schädigen darf. Nichtsdestoweniger wurde im Jahre 1902 ein Einbrecher in Berlin durch einen solchen Selbstschuss in die Stirne getötet, der an die Panzertüre einer Kasse befestigt war. Derartige Selbstschüsse wurden auch zu Morden verwendet; der Mechaniker <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">G. Z.</abbr> stellte einen Revolver in einer Kredenz auf, verband den Drücker mit der Türe durch eine Schnur und erschoss auf diese Art seine Frau, während er tatsächlich von seinem Wohnorte abwesend war. <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R. C.</abbr>, ein Budapester Kaufmann, befestigte in einem, seinem Bruder gehörigen Zigarrenkasten, eine Pistole, die beim Öffnen des Deckels seinen Bruder durch einen Unterleibsschuss tötlich verletzte. Der Rückschlag warf die Kiste von ihrem Standort, sodass der Mördermechanismus zu Tage trat, ehe <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R. C.</abbr> denselben bei Seite schaffen konnte.”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System der Kriminalistik</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 943. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩︎</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
